What happens when you type google.com in your browser and press Enter ?


Introduction

In the modern, digital age, we rely on the internet for almost everything. We may study, use social media to stay in touch with friends and family, play online games with players from across the world, listen to music, watch funny cat videos, exchange presentations with coworkers, conduct business meetings via video conferencing services, and more.
Many people have been curious about how we may travel almost anywhere in the globe from the comfort of our homes with just one click ever since the internet became accessible to everyone. For many, the answer to that question has remained a secret for many years. 
Many people use the internet without being aware of how it operates. In this article, I will explain what happens when you open your browser to surf the internet

Initial Concepts
I want to first describe what a webpage is before I begin. A web page is a hypertext document on the World Wide Web, delivered by a web server to the user and displayed in a web browser. A website consists of many web pages linked together under a common domain name. These  pages or files are located in computers that provide the service of storing said files and wait for someone to need them to deliver them. They are called servers because they serve the content that they hold to whoever needs it. 
These servers can vary in classes, the most common one is a web server, that serves web pages. We also have application servers, which  hold an application base code that will then be used to interact with a web browser or other applications, and  Database servers which hold a database that can be updated and consulted when needed.
These servers in order to deliver their content need to have an address so that the person needing said content can make a "letter" requesting the delivery; the person requesting the content in turn also has an address where the server can deliver the content to. These addresses are called IP (Internet Protocol) Address, a set of 4 numbers that range from 0 to 255 (one byte) separated by periods (ie. 127.0.0.1). Computers and other devices communicate using IP addresses to identify each other on the internet. But humans can't remember IP addresses, so they use words. 
DNS servers translate requests for names into IP addresses, controlling which server an end user will reach when they type a domain name into their web browser. These requests are called queries.

Another concept that is important to know is that the transmission of data can be one of two: Transmission Control Protocol (TCP/IP) and User Datagram Protocol (UDP). Each one determines the way the content of a server is served, or delivered. 
TCP is a connection (stream) oriented protocol, and is usually used to deliver static websites such as Wikipedia or Google and also email services and to download files to your computer because TCP makes sure that all the content that is needed gets delivered. It accomplishes this by sending the file in small packets of data and along with each packet a confirmation to know that the packet was delivered; that's why if you are ever downloading something and your internet connection suddenly drops when it comes back up you don't have to start over because the server would know exactly how many packets you have and how many you still need to receive. The downside to TCP is that because it has to confirm whether you got the packet or not before sending the next, it tends to be slower.
UDP is a connectionless (packet( oriented protocol, on the other hand, is usually used to serve Voice over IP (VoIP), online game and media streaming or live video. This is because UDP is a lot faster than TCP since UDP does not check if the information was received or not; it is not important. The only thing UDP cares about is sending the information. That is the reason why if you've ever watched a live video and if either your internet connection or the host's drops, you would just stop seeing the content; and when the connection comes back up you will only see the current stream of the broadcast and what was missed is forever lost. This is also true for online video games (if you've played them you know exactly what this means)

What really happens...
So back to the main question of what happens when you type www.google.com or any other URL (Uniform Resource Locator) in your web browser and press Enter. So the first thing that happens is that your browser looks up in its cache to see if that website was visited before and the IP address is known. If it can't find the IP address for the URL requested then it asks your operating system to locate the web site. The first place your operating system is going to check for the address of the URL you specified is in the hosts file (/etc/hosts in Linux and Mac, c:\windows\system32\drivers\etc\hosts in Windows). If the URL is not found inside this file, then the OS will make a DNS request to find the IP Address of the web page. The first step is to ask the Resolver. The resolver server is usually your ISP (Internet Service Provider). All resolvers must know one thing: where to locate the root server. The root server knows where to locate the .COM TLD server. TLD stands for Top-Level Domain. Resolver server look up in its cache to see if it knows the IP Address, if the Resolver does not know then it asks the root server to ask the .COM TLD (Top Level Domain) server - if your URL ends in .net then the TLD server would be .NET and so on - the TLD server will again check in its cache to see if the requested IP Address is there. If not, then it will have at least one of the authoritative name servers associated with that URL, and after going to the Name Server, it will return the IP Address associated with your URL. All this is done in a matter of milliseconds WOW!
After the OS has the IP Address and gives it to the browser, it then makes a GET (a type of HTTP Method) to the said IP Address. When the request is made the browser again makes the request to the OS which then, in turn, packs the request in the TCP traffic protocol we discussed earlier, and it is sent to the IP Address. On its way, it is checked by both the OS' and the server's firewall to make sure that there are no security violations. And upon receiving the request the server (usually a load balancer that directs traffic to all available server for that website) sends a response with the IP Address of the chosen server along with the SSL (Secure Sockets Layer) certificate to initiate a secure session (HTTPS). Finally, the chosen server then sends the HTML, CSS, and Javascript files (If any) back to the OS who in turn gives it to the browser to interpret it. And then you get your website as you know it.

Conclusion
Browser initiates TCP connection with the server. Browser sends the HTTP request to the server. Server processes request and sends back a response. Browser renders the content.
Thank you for reading! 

Resources
Webpage  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_page
Server (computing) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Server_(computing)#Hardware_requirement
How DNS works https://howdns.works/
TCP vs UDP https://www.diffen.com/difference/TCP_vs_UDP
How to edit your hosts file https://www.howtogeek.com/howto/27350/beginner-geek-how-to-edit-your-hosts-file/
